feat: add ephemeral kubernetes provider (#4927)
garden-io/garden: docs/basics/ephemeral-clusters.md

1. Login to Garden Cloud using `garden login` from your project root.
2. Configure the `ephemeral-kubernetes` provider in your project's configuration file. Here's an example configuration:

```yaml
providers:
  - name: ephemeral-kubernetes
    environments: [remote]

```
In the above configuration, we configure ephemeral-kubernetes for the `remote` environment.

## Deploy your project on ephemeral cluster

With the ephemeral-kubernetes provider configured, you can now deploy your project using the Garden CLI by running the following command:

```
garden deploy --env remote
```

The CLI will automatically provision an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster for your project and deploy your application to it.

## Usage quota and managing clusters

The ephemeral Kubernetes clusters are provided for free to all users. The ephemeral clusters are designed for short-term use and allow you to run and test your applications on Kubernetes.

Each user is granted a maximum of **20 hours per month** of ephemeral cluster usage where each cluster has a maximum lifetime of **4 hours**. After this period, the cluster is automatically destroyed.

> If you need to destroy the cluster before its maximum lifetime of 4 hours expires, you can do so by visiting [Garden Cloud](https://app.garden.io) and selecting the option to destroy the ephemeral cluster from there. This allows you to release resources and terminate the cluster when it's no longer needed.

Reviewer: I think that makes sense, but i think we can release the first iteration without additional features around managing clusters. I like the idea of deleting clusters after a short time maybe 30 min of inactivity.

## Ingresses

Ephemeral Kubernetes Clusters fully support ingresses and each cluster is assigned its own unique default hostname dynamically when created.

> The ingress URLs are not publicly accessible and require authentication via GitHub. To preview an ingress URL, you must authenticate with GitHub and authorize the "Garden Ephemeral Environment Previews" app.

Reviewer 2: I think we can directly mention you need to be authenticated to app.garden.io, let's not mention what kind of OAuth providers we use, also because we might change these in the future.

## Referring to the dynamic hostname in your Garden configs

If you want to refer to the hostname that is assigned dynamically when the cluster is created, you can refer to that using the output `${providers.ephemeral-kubernetes.outputs.default-hostname}`. This can be useful if, for example, you want to expose an ingress on a subdomain of the default hostname. e.g. You want to expose api on api.<default-hostname>.

To leverage the dynamically assigned hostname when your ephemeral cluster is created, you can reference it using the following output syntax: `${providers.ephemeral-kubernetes.outputs.default-hostname}`. This proves particularly valuable when you need to expose an ingress on a subdomain of the default hostname.

For instance, if you wish to expose an API service on a subdomain like api.<default-hostname>, you can easily achieve this in your Garden configuration. Here's an example of how to configure your Garden file to expose an API on a subdomain of the default hostname:

```
....
ingresses:
    - path: /
      port: http
      hostname: api.${providers.ephemeral-kubernetes.outputs.default-hostname}
```

## Accessing the Ephemeral Cluster via Kubeconfig

> Once your ephemeral cluster is created, the Kubeconfig file for that cluster is stored on your local computer. The path to the Kubeconfig file is shown in the logs when you deploy your project using Garden and looks like following:

Reviewer 3: Kubeconfig is with a lowercase "k" [according to Kubernetes's docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/).

---
title: Start a Free Kubernetes Cluster
order: 4
---

# Ephemeral Kubernetes Clusters

At Garden, we're committed to reducing the friction in onboarding and trying out our platform for your own projects. To make Kubernetes adoption more accessible and convenient, we've introduced **Ephemeral Kubernetes Clusters**. These ephemeral clusters are designed to provide you with a hassle-free way to explore Garden's capabilities and Kubernetes without the need of an existing Kubernetes cluster.

> ## Usage quota and managing clusters

Author: I think it's better to inform user first about the usage quota and then proceed with docs around configuration, deploying, ingresses etc. Feels more intuitive to me. I had this section after ingresses previously but moved above on @worldofgeese suggestion and liked the idea.

> ## Usage quota and managing clusters

Reviewer 3: Yes, we don't want folks getting surprised by this IMO.

> The ephemeral Kubernetes clusters are provided for free to all users. The ephemeral clusters are designed for short-term use and allow you to run and test your applications with Garden on Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer 2: Let's move this part above.

Each user is granted a maximum of **20 hours per month** of ephemeral cluster usage where each cluster has a maximum lifetime of **4 hours**. After this period, the cluster is automatically destroyed.

If you need to destroy the cluster before its maximum lifetime of 4 hours expires, you can do so by visiting [Garden Cloud](https://app.garden.io) and selecting the option to destroy the ephemeral cluster from there. This allows you to release resources and terminate the cluster when it's no longer needed.

## Configuring your projects to use ephemeral Kubernetes cluster

To get started with Ephemeral Kubernetes Clusters, follow these steps:

1. Login to Garden Cloud using `garden login` from your project root.
2. Configure the `ephemeral-kubernetes` provider in your project's configuration file. Here's an example configuration:

```yaml
providers:
  - name: ephemeral-kubernetes
    environments: [remote]

```
In the above configuration, we configure ephemeral-kubernetes for the `remote` environment.

## Deploy your project on ephemeral cluster

> With the ephemeral-kubernetes provider configured, you can now deploy your project using the Garden CLI by running the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the provider is configured, you can deploy your project using the Garden CLI by running the following command:
```

```
garden deploy --env remote
```

> The CLI will automatically provision an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster for your project and deploy your application to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Garden will automatically provision an Ephemeral Kubernetes Cluster for your project and deploy your application to it.
```

## Ingresses

Ephemeral Kubernetes Clusters fully support ingresses and each cluster is assigned its own unique default hostname dynamically when created.

The ingress URLs are not publicly accessible and require authentication via GitHub. To preview an ingress URL, you need to authenticate with GitHub and authorize the "Garden Ephemeral Environment Previews" app.

The first time you attempt to preview an ingress URL, you will be automatically redirected to GitHub for authorization of the "Garden Ephemeral Environment Previews" app. This is a one-time step, and subsequent ingress previews won't require reauthorization, ensuring a seamless experience as long as you remain logged into GitHub.

> [!NOTE]
> Ingress URLs can only be previewed by the user who was logged in to Garden Cloud when a deployment was done using the ephemeral-kubernetes provider.

## Referring to the dynamic hostname in your Garden configs

> If you want to refer to the hostname that is assigned dynamically when the cluster is created, you can refer to that using the output `${providers.ephemeral-kubernetes.outputs.default-hostname}`. This can be useful if, for example, you want to expose an ingress on a subdomain of the default hostname. e.g. You want to expose api on api.<default-hostname>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to refer to the hostname that is assigned dynamically when the cluster is created, you can refer to that using the output `${providers.ephemeral-kubernetes.outputs.default-hostname}`. This can be useful if, for example, you want to expose an ingress on a subdomain of the default hostname. e.g. You want to expose `api` on `api.<default-hostname>`.
```

To leverage the dynamically assigned hostname when your ephemeral cluster is created, you can reference it using the following output syntax: `${providers.ephemeral-kubernetes.outputs.default-hostname}`. This proves particularly valuable when you need to expose an ingress on a subdomain of the default hostname.

> For instance, if you wish to expose an API service on a subdomain like api.<default-hostname>, you can easily achieve this in your Garden configuration. Here's an example of how to configure your Garden file to expose an API on a subdomain of the default hostname:

Reviewer 2: Same here.

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

....
ingresses:
    - path: /
      port: http
      hostname: api.${providers.ephemeral-kubernetes.outputs.default-hostname}
```

## Accessing the ephemeral cluster via kubeconfig

> Once your ephemeral cluster is created, the kubeconfig file for that cluster is stored on your local computer. The path to the kubeconfig file is shown in the logs when you deploy your project using Garden and looks like following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your ephemeral cluster is created, the kubeconfig file for that cluster is stored on your local machine. The path to the kubeconfig file is shown in the logs when you deploy your project using Garden and looks like following:
```

```
kubeconfig for ephemeral cluster saved at path: /garden/examples/ephemeral-cluster-demo/.garden/ephemeral-kubernetes/<cluster-id>-kubeconfig.yaml
```

> This kubeconfig file allows you to interact with the cluster using kubectl or other Kubernetes tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This kubeconfig file allows you to interact with the cluster using `kubectl` or other Kubernetes tools.
```

## Limitations

As of today, the ephemeral-kubernetes provider has the following limitations:

> - Local docker builds are currently not supported. Only the in-cluster builds using Kaniko are supported however that is configured by default for the ephemeral-kubernetes provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Local docker builds are currently not supported. In-cluster building with Kaniko is the only supported building method and it is configured by default at the provider level.
```

## Example projects using the `ephemeral-kubernetes` provider

To demonstrate the use of the `ephemeral-kubernetes` provider, we have added an example project: [ephemeral-cluster-demo](https://github.com/garden-io/garden/tree/main/examples) under our examples collection. Check out the `ephemeral-cluster-demo` example and README at:

> <!-- todo add example link once example is merged: https://github.com/garden-io/garden/tree/main/examples/ephemeral-cluster-demo -->

Reviewer 2: We should be able to add this link right?

Author: After it's merged because otherwise the CI step check-docs will fail due to a dead link.
